Neptune
=======

Neptune I: 16-bit RISC Microprocessor

Neptune I is a 16-bit RISC microprocessor originally designed to run on a Xilinx Spartan 6 FPGA (Field-Programmable Gate Array) completely written in Verilog, standardized as IEEE 1364. It has 13-bit addressing, although that is versatile. Its portable design makes it possible to increase the word size or addressing size without much effort. It consists of a simplistic architecture fully capable of complex instruction set microcoding if necessary. Neptune I's design philosophy comprises of ease-of-use alongside full-fledged program execution capabilities in a tiny, understandable design. Neptune I's ALU is hardware-capable of addition, subtraction and multiplication and extensive overflow/underflow detection alongside all types of comparisons and bitwise operations and rotations. Its architecture includes eight fast-access registers in its dual port register file or array, a larger 2 KB/16 Kb internal cache, dubbed and utilized as random access memory for simplicity and a 2 Kb LIFO stack external to the cache. The control matrix is completely microcoded and lies internal to the FPGA, making changes to instruction execution possible and easy. Neptune I instruction set allows for a MIPS-like arithmetic instruction, where the two operands and destination register can be specified in one word.

The microprocessor is accompanied by two major components for user interaction. It consists of the user interface and the display driver. The display driver can further be subdivided into the display decoder and serial communications module. The user interface is responsible for interfacing the user and the microprocessor. The user interfaces acts as a medium of receiving external data and passing on external requests to the control matrix for acceptance and further processing. The display driver with the help of the user interface taps several data flow pathways in the architecture for data output. The hexadecimal coded binary is decoded by the display decoder, running at 1 MHz, into several one byte display sequences to be passed onto the serial communications module for sending off to the 7-segment displays. Externally, 4094 ICs decode the serial data at 500 kHz and latched them for the displays. Strobes control display updates, done at 62.5 kHz.

The control matrix holds superiority and is a barrier between external requests and the microprocessor itself. The user interface must request the control matrix for all kinds of data loading operations. All entities are designed to read at all times and only need write enable lines.

Neptune I is theoretically capable of handling a maximum clock of 130 MHz. But, it's run at 100 MHz in full clock speed mode and at 20 Hz on slow clock speed mode. The microprocessor is capable of interfacing with user-made peripheral devices. It also supports interrupts and can detect memory faults.
